
### Quantum Physics for the General Audience series: Part 1
&nbsp;&nbsp;In this series, we discuss fundamental concepts from the world of quantum in a
way which is suited for the general audience, i.e., people with no formal training
in physics.

<br>

&nbsp;&nbsp;Quantum physics intrigues us all. It is seen as an unfathomable topic by
many. Although some aspects of quantum physics (such as the philosophical
interpretations and mathematical formulations) can get very complicated, I be-
lieve that some concepts which are at the core of it can be explained in a clear
and coincise manner.

&nbsp;&nbsp;In order to step into the world of quantum, we need to first understand
how quantum physics emerged. Up until the early 20th century, all physical
phenomena was explained by classical physics which was developed by great
minds such as Isaac Newton, Galileo, etc. ... Classical physics dictates that if
you know where a certain object currently is and how fast it is moving at the
moment, and you know the forces which it is subject to (i.e. external factors
such as someone pushing on the object), you can definitely predict where it is
going to end up after some time has passed. This means that there is no chance
involved in the game of predicting the future of a moving object if you have
enough information.

&nbsp;&nbsp;In the late 1800s and early 1900s, scientists began finding puzzles that classi-
cal physics could not explain. One famous example is the double-slit experiment.
First done with light, it showed that light behaves like a wave, creating ripple-
like patterns when it passes through two slits. Later, in the 20th century, the
experiment was repeated with tiny particles such as electrons, and something
astonishing happened: when left alone, the particles acted like waves, creating
the same interference patterns. But when scientists tried to check which slit a
particle went through, the wave pattern vanished, and the particles acted like
little solid objects instead. This strange behavior revealed that the world at very
small scales follows rules very different from everyday life, the rules of quantum
physics.

&nbsp;&nbsp;When we say particles act as waves when we don’t look at them, we mean
that they behave as a blob of slime which is spread out instead of being present
at one point. However, once we look at them, we see that the particle is at a
certain position and the probability of where we find the particle once we look
at it, depends on how dense the slime is at different points. This is what makes
quantum physics a probabilistic theory because unlike classical physics (recall
what we said previously about classical physics making definite predictions), you
can only predict the probability that an object will end up at a certain point,
you cannot be 100% confident all the time, even if you have all the information
about the object’s movement and its surroundings.
In quantum physics, this idea of not being able to definitely predict a certain
property is not special to position, it also appears for different properties such
as the object’s speed or the way it spins. This is one of the main factors which
makes quantum physics so weird (and beautiful).

&nbsp;&nbsp;An honest first reaction on your part might be skepticism and you might
ask: “Well if all this is true, how come we do not experience it in our daily
lives?”. You have every right to doubt ideas which do not agree with your ex-
perience, in fact that is a good scientist’s approach to reality. The answer to
the above question is the fact that, quantum phenomena takes place on very
small scales, such as the world of subatomic particles. Scientists have verified
these phenomena by doing experiments in labs. So even if you throw a baseball
and do not look at it, it behaves as a solid object and not a slime, since at the
macroscopic scale quantum effects are negligible.

&nbsp;&nbsp;To conclude, quantum physics is a probabilistic theory whose consequences
are usually observed at very small scales. It makes nature fundamentally non-
deterministic.