
<p style="text-indent: 2em;" >Although the quantum internet is not here yet, researchers are pushing the boundaries of the field of quantum communications everyday. We highlight the most important advancements that happened this month.
Scientists at CERN are trying to utilize their existing timing and synchronization technology called "White Rabbit" for quantum communications [1]. The experiment consists of sending a single photon from a pair of entangled photons with the conventional optical timing signal in the optical fiber. Timing precision is an essential component in quantum key distribution protocols which are based on entanglement and ``White Rabbit" could provide the synchronization required for the success of such protocols.

</p>

<p style="text-indent: 2em;" >A press release by the Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Optics and Precision Engineering IOF [2] reported on the 10th of October that scientists from the German Aerospace Center, the Max Planck Intitute for the Science of Light, Friedrich Alexander University Erlangen and the Fraunhofer institute have tested quantum channels in flight. This was done by sending photons from an aircraft which acted as a mobile node in a quantum network to a ground station. Although it sounds impossible, the photons made it to the ion traps located at the ground station. Quantum channels between the mobile and stationary nodes (aircraft and ground station) were measured multiple times.
</p>

<p style="text-indent: 2em;" >In a recent paper titled "Quantum Key Distribution in the Iberian Peninsula" [3] which appeared on the arxiv on the 14th of October, V. D. Tubio et. al. propose a satellite system for Quantum Key Distribution which could link Madrid with Bilbao, Lisbon and Barcelona. Spontaneous parametric down conversion is used to generate the entangled photons on the low earth orbit satellites which are later sent to the ground stations.
</p>

<p style="text-indent: 2em;" >As you can see, researchers are taking quantum communication to the skies. In an already connected world, having quantum nodes around the globe which are connected via quantum channels not only promises technological advancements but is also necessary in a post-quantum era. Quantum communications are more secure since instead of relying on computational hardness, they provide fundamentally secure protocols for information transmission which are based on the laws of quantum physics. It is an exciting time to be alive, it is an exciting time to do physics.
</p>

<br>

### References

1- Del Rosso, A. (2025, October 2). White Rabbit
meets quantum entanglement. CERN. Retrieved from
https://home.cern/news/news/computing/white-rabbit-meets-quantum-
entanglement

2- Fraunhofer IOF. (2025, October 10). Foundation for the future quantum network: quantum channels tested in flight [Press release]. Fraunhofer Institute for Applied Optics and Precision Engineering IOF. Retrieved from https://www.iof.fraunhofer.de/enpressrelease/2025/QuNETkey-experiment-3-Quantum-channels-tested-in-flight.html

3- Dom´ınguez Tub´ıo, V., Bad´as Aldecocea, M., Bakker, D. L., Amaral, G. C.,
L´opez, D., & Borregaard, J. (2025, October 14). Quantum Key Distribution
in the Iberian Peninsula. arXiv. https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.12951