In part 1 of this series, we saw how in quantum physics, a certain property can take on multiple values at the same time. We now use this concept to introduce the concept of a qubit.

Let us begin our discussion by talking about baseballs. As you know, baseballs can have multiple properties such as speed, position, direction of spin, stiffness, size, etc. These properties can take on different values: the speed can be 5 m/s or 500 m/s (or any of the infinitely many possibilities), it could be situated on earth or on the moon (or anywhere in the universe) and so on for different properties.

Now consider a universe where we only have one type of object: a baseball. No planets, no stars, nothing but baseballs. In this hypothetical universe, baseballs have only one property: color. They don't move and we do not speak of their positions, the only property which can take on different values and that we care about is color and it can only take on two values: red or blue.

In this universe, the baseballs obey the laws of quantum physics. As a consequence, the color of a certain baseball can be both red and blue at the same time, and it only takes on a definite value when an observer looks at the baseball. Therefore, we should incorporate in our baseball universe an observer.

Now bear with me as I write down some mathematical symbols which summarize the quantum nature of the color of the baseballs, I promise this will not get complicated. As we mentioned, color is the only property that matters in this universe, therefore, if we are going to discuss the state of a baseball, we speak of its color. The state of the baseball is represented in the following way:

1. |color = red⟩, if the baseball is red
2. |color = blue⟩, if the baseball is blue

As we mentioned, the baseball can be red and blue at the same time if no one is looking at it, but as soon as the observer in this hypothetical universe looks at it, the baseball has one value. The observer will see that the baseball is completely red or completely blue, he will not see that the baseball is a purple mix of both colors. Can the observer predict which color the baseball is going to be before he/she looks at it? No, he can only know probabilities. So for example, we can have a baseball whose state is given by

    |color = red 50% of the time and blue 50% of the time⟩

So if the observer has 50 baseballs in this above state, when he looks at them, 25 of the baseballs will probably appear red and the other 25 blue.

This is what we call a qubit. It is an object, which has a certain property which can take on TWO values AT THE SAME TIME because of the laws of quantum physics. Such a hypothetical baseball universe is not necessary for the existence of qubits, we simply introduced it for pedagogical reasons, so that the reader could forget about everything else and just focus on the color property of the baseballs. In our universe, in small scales, objects could have such binary properties (like that of the blue/red color of the baseball). Even if they possess different properties, this is not an issue, the important thing is that we focus on a certain binary property. This becomes our qubit. It has been constructed several times by physicists in labs.

The word qubit is short for "quantum bit". A bit is the unit of information used in classical computers. You can think of it as a binary property: a 0 or a 1, a door being closed or open... What distinguishes a bit from a qubit is its quantum behavior. While a classical door, can be either open or closed, a quantum door can be both open and closed at the same time if no one is looking at it.

The reason why we are interested in qubits is the fact that they can be used for quantum computation. We will discuss this in upcoming blog posts in this series "Quantum for the General Audience".